The COVID-19 pandemic has devastated many low- and middle-income countries, causing widespread food insecurity and a sharp decline in living standards1. In response to this crisis, governments and humanitarian organizations worldwide have distributed social assistance to more than 1.5 billion people2. Targeting is a central challenge in administering these programmes: it remains a difficult task to rapidly identify those with the greatest need given available data3,4. Here we show that data from mobile phone networks can improve the targeting of humanitarian assistance. Our approach uses traditional survey data to train machine-learning algorithms to recognize patterns of poverty in mobile phone data; the trained algorithms can then prioritize aid to the poorest mobile subscribers. We evaluate this approach by studying a flagship emergency cash transfer program in Togo, which used these algorithms to disburse millions of US dollars worth of COVID-19 relief aid. Our analysis compares outcomes—including exclusion errors, total social welfare and measures of fairness—under different targeting regimes. Relative to the geographic targeting options considered by the Government of Togo, the machine-learning approach reduces errors of exclusion by 4–21%. Relative to methods requiring a comprehensive social registry (a hypothetical exercise; no such registry exists in Togo), the machine-learning approach increases exclusion errors by 9–35%. These results highlight the potential for new data sources to complement traditional methods for targeting humanitarian assistance, particularly in crisis settings in which traditional data are missing or out of date.

Main
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to a sharp decline in living standards across the world, as policies designed to stop the spread of the disease have disrupted normal economic activity. Economically vulnerable households in low- and middle-income countries have been among the hardest hit, with more than 100 million individuals estimated to have transitioned into extreme poverty since the onset of the pandemic5.

To offset the most severe consequences of this sudden decline in income, governments and humanitarian organizations around the world have mobilized relief efforts. It has been estimated that more than 3,300 new social assistance programmes have been launched2 since early 2020, providing more than US$800 billion in cash transfer payments to over 1.5 billion people (roughly one fifth of the world’s population).

The overwhelming majority of COVID-19 response efforts—and the majority of cash transfer programmes globally—provide targeted social assistance3,4. In other words, specific criteria—typically a proxy for socioeconomic status—are used to determine potential eligibility. In most wealthy nations, governments rely on recent household income data to determine programme eligibility6. However, in low- and lower middle-income countries (LMICs), where economic activity is often informal and based on home-produced agriculture, governments typically do not observe income for the vast majority of the population3. Other potential sources of targeting data are often incomplete or out of date7,8; for example, only half of the poorest countries have completed a census in the past 10 years9. In such contexts, data gaps preclude governments from implementing well-targeted social assistance programmes10,11.

Here we develop, implement and evaluate an approach to targeting social assistance based on machine-learning algorithms and non-traditional ‘big data’ from satellites and mobile phone networks. This approach leverages recent advances in machine learning that show that such data can help accurately estimate the wealth of small geographic regions12,13,14,15,16 and individual mobile subscribers17,18,19. It also builds on a rich economics literature on the design of appropriate mechanisms for targeting social assistance3,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29. See Supplementary Discussion, section 1 for a summary of previous work.

Humanitarian response to COVID-19 in Togo
Our results are based on the design and evaluation of Novissi, a flagship emergency social assistance programme carried out in Togo. The Government of Togo launched Novissi in April 2020, shortly after the first cases of COVID-19 appeared in the country. As economic lockdown orders forced many Togolese to stop working and led to widespread food insecurity (Supplementary Fig. 1), Novissi aimed to provide subsistence cash relief to those most affected (see https://novissi.gouv.tg/). Eligible beneficiaries received bi-weekly payments of roughly US$10. In an effort to minimize in-person contact, Novissi enrolment and payments were implemented digitally: beneficiaries registered using their mobile phones and transfers were made via mobile money. Full details on the Novissi programme are provided in Methods, ‘The COVID-19 pandemic in Togo’.

When the government first launched Novissi, it did not have a traditional social registry that could be used to assess programme eligibility, and did not have the time or the resources to build such a registry in the middle of the pandemic. The most recent census, which was completed in 2011, did not contain information on household wealth or poverty; more recent national surveys on living standards only contacted a small fraction of all households (Methods, ‘The COVID-19 pandemic in Togo’). Instead, eligibility for Novissi was determined on the basis of data contained in a national voter registry that had been updated in late 2019. Specifically, benefits were initially disbursed to individuals who met three criteria: (1) ‘self-targeted’20 by dialling in to the Novissi platform and entering basic information from their mobile phone; (2) registered to vote in specific regions (the programme initially focused on the Greater Lomé region around the capital city); and (3) self-declared to work in an informal occupation in their voter registration. The decision to target informal occupations helped prioritize benefits to people who were forced to stop working at the onset of the crisis. However, this approach does not necessarily target benefits to the poorest households in the country (Supplementary Fig. 2).

Our research efforts focused on helping the government expand the Novissi programme from informal workers in Greater Lomé to poorer individuals in rural regions of the country, and were designed to meet the government’s two stated policy objectives: first, to direct benefits to the poorest geographic regions of the country; and second, to prioritize benefits to the poorest mobile subscribers in those regions. (Individuals without access to a mobile phone could not receive Novissi payments, which were delivered digitally using mobile money; see Methods, ‘Programme exclusions’ for details.) The approach we developed, which uses machine learning to analyse non-traditional data from satellites and mobile phone networks, has two distinct steps (Extended Data Fig. 1).

Targeting with mobile phone data
In the first step, we obtained public micro-estimates of the relative wealth of every 2.4 km by 2.4 km region in Togo, which were constructed by applying machine-learning algorithms to high-resolution satellite imagery16. These estimates provide an indication of the relative wealth of all the households in each small grid cell; we take the population-weighted average of these grid cells to estimate the average wealth of every canton, Togo’s smallest administrative unit (see Methods, ‘Poverty maps’).

In the second step, we estimated the average daily consumption of each mobile phone subscriber by applying machine-learning algorithms to mobile phone metadata provided by Togo’s two mobile phone operators (see Methods, ‘Data privacy concerns’). Specifically, we conducted surveys with a large and representative sample of mobile phone subscribers, used the surveys to measure the wealth and/or consumption of each subscriber, and then matched the survey-based estimates to detailed metadata on each subscriber’s history of phone use. This sample was used to train supervised machine-learning algorithms that predict wealth and consumption from phone use17,18,19 (Pearson’s ρ ranges from 0.41–0.46; Methods, ‘Predicting poverty from phone data’). This second step is similar in spirit to a traditional proxy means test (PMT), with two main differences: we used a high-dimensional vector of mobile phone features instead of a low-dimensional vector of assets to estimate wealth; and we used machine-learning algorithms designed to maximize out-of-sample predictive power instead of the traditional linear regression that maximizes in-sample goodness of fit30.

Evaluation of targeting accuracy
Our main analysis evaluates the performance of this new targeting approach that combines machine learning and mobile phone data—which we refer to more succinctly as the phone-based approach—by comparing targeting errors using this approach to targeting errors under three counterfactual approaches: a geographic targeting approach that the government piloted in summer 2020 (in which all individuals are eligible within the poorest prefectures (Togo’s admin-2 level), or poorest cantons (Togo’s admin-3 level); occupation-based targeting (including Novissi’s original approach to targeting informal workers, as well as an ‘optimal’ approach to targeting the poorest occupation categories in the country); and a parsimonious method based on phone data without machine learning (that uses total expenditures on calling and texting as a proxy for wealth).

We present results that compare the effectiveness of these different targeting mechanisms in two different scenarios. First, we evaluate the actual policy scenario faced by the government of Togo in September of 2020, which involved distributing cash to 60,000 beneficiaries in Togo’s 100 poorest cantons. This first scenario is evaluated using data collected in a large phone survey we designed for this purpose and conducted in September 2020. The ‘ground truth’ measure of poverty in this first scenario is a PMT, as consumption data could not be feasibly collected in the phone survey. The PMT is based on a stepwise regression procedure, described in Supplementary Methods, section 3, which captures roughly 48% of the variation in consumption. Thus, for the first scenario focused on the rural Novissi programme, all targeting methods are evaluated with respect to this PMT. The phone-based machine-learning model is similarly trained using the PMT as ground truth. Second, we simulate and evaluate a more general and hypothetical policy scenario in which the government is interested in targeting the poorest individuals nationwide; this scenario is evaluated using national household survey data collected in person by the government in 2018 and 2019. The second simulation uses consumption as the ground truth measure of poverty. These data are described in the Methods section ‘Data sources’ and details on the evaluation are in the Methods section ‘Targeting evaluations﻿.'

In the first scenario focused on reaching the poorest people in the 100 poorest cantons, we find that the phone-based approach to targeting substantially reduces errors of exclusion (true poor who are mistakenly deemed ineligible) and errors of inclusion (non-poor who are mistakenly deemed eligible) relative to the other feasible approaches to targeting available to the government of Togo (Fig. 1a and Table 1, columns 3 to 6). We focus on the ability of each targeting method to reach the poorest 29% in each of the two survey datasets, as the rural expansion of Novissi only had sufficient funding to provide benefits to 29% of individuals in eligible geographies (Extended Data Tables 1, 2 evaluate performance using alternative poverty thresholds). Using a PMT as a measure of ‘true’ poverty status, phone-based targeting (area under the curve (AUC) = 0.70) outperforms the other feasible methods of targeting rural Novissi aid (for example, AUC = 0.59–0.64 for geographic blanket targeting). As a result, errors of exclusion (defined as 1 – Recall) are lower for the phone-based approach (53%) than for feasible alternatives (59%–78%).